---
publish: true
---
This semester is to design the tools much better for our research

Doctoral work is hard because it can look similar between dissertations, but it's all different because of specialization.

## D.Min Attributes

1. Specific and Contextual
	- it has to be very specific
2. Doctoral of Ministry is a program that is action oriented. 
3. Reflective and Theological
	- Difficult to do good study in theology, but then to put it into practice
4. Interdisciplinary
	- Marries together theology and other disciplines to make the church better. 
5. Collaborative and participatory


Use the outline to slot in your final paper
Just be approved by the advisor before defense


Date Outline
- Week 1-3 - Read
- Week 4 - First section of proposal due
- Week 5-7 - Literature review and different sections due
- Week 8-10 - Schedule a meeting with Academic Advisor and go over proposal
- Rest of weeks - Defend and reflect

## Integrated Literature Review

 * Comprehensive Understanding:
	 * It provides a thorough understanding of existing research and literature related to the topic. This allows the researcher to identify gaps, trends, and key findings in the field of ministry.
* Theoretical Framework:
	* It helps in constructing a solid theoretical framework for the dissertation. By integrating various studies, the researcher can develop a robust conceptual foundation to support their research questions and hypotheses.
* Critical Analysis:
	* An integrative literature review allows for critical analysis and synthesis of different perspectives and methodologies. This critical engagement enhances the depth and rigor of the dissertation.

More important to be able to construct a value adding argument with a list of resources than just putting forward an avalanche of information

> "Listening is so close to loving that most people can't see the difference."


* Is not a series of quotations.
* Is not a linear list of sources.
* Is not a book report.
* Is not a list of sources that support your idea.
 
Is a unique integration of sources that are structured around a central topic that you are studying.

* Synthesize the Literature.Compare and contrast: 
	* Highlight similarities and differences between studies, focusing on key findings, and approaches.
* Develop a Conceptual Framework Integrate findings. 
	* Synthesize the findings into a coherent conceptual framework or model that will guide your research. One way to visualize this to to imagine bringing your sources around a table to discuss your topic and to organize it.