---
{"publish":true,"created":"2025-02-08T01:33:37.065-06:00","modified":"2025-08-22T12:36:56.214-05:00","cssclasses":""}
---


# Saved by Faith and Hospitality Book Review

*Saved by Faith and Hospitality* is an intensive look at the idea that hospitality is not something some people should do, but rather a core practice and identity of one that proclaims to follow Jesus. Thankfully, the author himself writes the purpose of this book outright: "This book forcibly argues that hospitality to strangers is not an optional practice for Christians. The biblical texts consistently speak of the identity and vocation of Christians as those who have experienced God's hospitality whereby all of us are welcomed into God's family."[@jippSavedFaithHospitality2017,9] Said another way, Christians have been welcomed to the table by Christ and it is sinful to deny that invitation to other people. 

Jipp defines hospitality as "the act of process whereby the identity of the stranger is transformed into that of guest. While hospitality often uses the basic necessities of life such as the protection of one's home and the offer of food, drink, conversation, and clothing, the primary impulse of hospitality is to create a safe and welcoming place where a stranger can be converted into a friend."[@jippSavedFaithHospitality2017,2] It is important to highlight that the goal isn't to move from interaction to salvation, but for one person to engage with a stranger to move from unknown to friend. Through the act of being with people for the sake of being people, a person reflects the act of Christ going to the cross without consideration of who was holy or not. 

The book is divided into two major sections. The first is titled "Divine Hospitality" and has chapters that specifically looking at how Jesus interacted as the ultimate host to the world. The second is titled "Human Hospitality" and explores people can extend hospitality to others, specifically in highly charged situations such as immigration and greed. The book overall is written with large portions of exegesis and never gives outright calls to action for the reader, but it does give example, rational, and scripture in how we can advocate for more hospitable positions in ourselves and in our politics. 

This book is an excellent resource that uses an abundance of scripture to show the importance and necessity of hospitality, especially towards those who may be considered "the other." It is beneficial to anyone who wants to have a strong argument based in scripture for hospitality. 

The danger of this book may be that it can be seen as radical. I am able to see how it can be accused of having a slant towards activism if the reader does not read it with an open mind. For example, right near the beginning of the book, Jipp writes "While I do not offer specific suggestions for public policy, I do suggest that when churches begin to evaluate the alignment between the Bible's mandate to care for the other with how contemporary North American society and public policy often treat undocumented workers, the incarcerated, and the religious other (to give just three examples) this should create stances of solidarity with these marginalized communities that will inevitably result in prophetic challenges against unjust social structures."[@jippSavedFaithHospitality2017, 8-9] This alone will stop many people as they will feel attacked by what could considered a radical ideology. 

This book helps solidify my understanding of the gospel and mission of hospitality, but if I were to invite others to read it, I would be sure to read along with them and/or do so in a small group. It requires intentionality and someone who is good at navigating tough topics with an open mind. 