---
word-goal: 600
publish: true
---
%% Post by Saturday, May 31 an essay (approx. 600 words) in which you summarize the ways that the Celtic Christian tradition is affecting your theology and spirituality. As you are able, articulate continuities with where you’ve been and new directions. 
 %%

The Celtic Christian tradition is a revelatory way in understanding my spiritual walk with God, and I have been drawn to praying and connecting more with God through all things. In has begun to ground me in new ways, it has changed the way I pray, and it has given a way to express I have always viewed God at work in the world around me. 

This feeling of "revelation" has occurred a couple of other times in my Christian life. The first was encountering Nazarene theology, which ultimately led to Wesley and Arminius. It was a like a drink of refreshing water because I had come from a world in which theology was my understanding of theology was heavily influenced by the Evangelical (Baptists and non-denominational churches) and Charismatic wings of the church. It is worth noting that I was initially opened to Wesleyanism because of the ecumenical and intentional spirit of the believers in which I first discovered it, which was in contrast from the theology and churches I had experienced up until that point. 

Therefore, it is with self-awareness that I am in a spot to find Celtic spirituality so intriguing because I am finding the communities and voices prominent in our church family to be in a similar posture as the evangelical churches I struggled with prior to joining the Nazarene church. In other words, there is has been a discontentment, and whether it be the external world or the work of Holy Spirit internally, I am finding myself seeking to gain a deeper understanding of God. 

Another time I have felt so drawn to a theological concept was at the beginning of my Doctoral program when I had the class Prolegomena in Spiritual Formation and Discipleship with Susangeline Patrick, PhD. I remember sitting in one our lectures learning about how early Christians viewed a different type of connection with the world around them. There was a much deeper connection to themselves and their environment. It was as if there was now permission to experience God at a newer-deeper, fundamental level within ourselves. 

It resonates to my core to understand that all things in creation have the imprint of Christ upon them [^1] and allows me to not really care too much how the earth was created, but rather focus that Christ is in all creation. I want to include Earle's words here as it captures, what I think, is becoming a profound cornerstone of my understanding of creation, therefore an understanding of God: 
>The created order, from smallest particle to furthest star, is recognized as an active agent of God’s own goodness and mercy. God’s blessing, majesty, and creativity are revealed through earth, sea, sky, wind, plants, and creatures. This spirituality directly refutes any splitting of matter and spirit. Celtic spirituality is notable for its supreme confidence that this cosmos is in God, and that if it were not in God, it simply could not, would not, exist. In this respect, the way of Celtic Christian spirituality follows in the way of the Hebrew Scriptures and in some ways sounds very Jewish. Further, this is a spirituality that confidently affirms that matter is of God—every speck of it, every quark, every not-yet-named particle.[21 @earleCelticChristianSpirituality2011]

While I have resonated with many of the excerpts and prayers Earle has included in her book, Pelagius almost jumps off the page to me. One of my favorite things that Earle says about him is that "Pelagius understands that the whole creation is in and of God, and that God infinitely transcends that creation. Because all matter has a divine origin, we have a sacred duty to care for the earth and for one another, and to share equitably the gifts we have been given."[16 @earleCelticChristianSpirituality2011]

If this book represents Celtic Christianity, then I am on the path to embracing that as a part of my identity and will continue and strive to perceive God in all things, Christ through all things, and Holy Spirit with all things. 

[^1]: John 1:3