**Compare and contrast "strategic planning" and "Christian discernment" processes & practices as Beaumont presents them. What does she mean when she identifies herself as a "spiritual director to the organization"?**

The first thing that comes to mind when thinking of the differences between strategic planning and Christian discernment is time and posture. Strategic planning requires and defined time (both in limit and schedule), while discernment is not about the time, but the process. Beaumont writes: "Traditional strategic planning makes linear assumptions about how the future will unfold. We are standing here, and we want to get there. These incremental steps will take us there. In liminal seasons learning and logic are not linear. We build the bridge as we walk on it." [114, @beaumontHowLeadWhen2019] This type of planning is vastly different than allowing The Holy Spirit to lead the time and decisions of the group. 

The other thing I mentioned is posture. While I am of the belief that some structure is generally good, strategic planning is in control of the structure and works towards the decision, whereas discernment providing space for the Holy Spirit to work and allowing the process to be the important part of the process as opposed to the decision. In some ways it reminds me of studying for a test and knowing the material because you've learned the material vs. cramming for the test the night before. Both versions may result in a good test score, but the one who has been in the process will likely be more competent and have the skills to develop further upon. 

**What from either of the books or the article is most applicable/pertinent to your congregational or organizational setting?**

Learning about liminal leadership is like a drink of cold water on a hot day. I did not know how in depth and meaningful that type of leadership can be. We are certainly in a liminal part of our local church history in that we are only 3 years into our current neighborhood and 5 years since a merger. Our senior pastor has been in a stage of liminal leadership for a long time, and I came from one myself. Many of the examples that were given in the book mirror exercises and postures I have tried to take up myself in leadership, but never with any real intentionality towards the long process that is required of this style of leadership. 

Personally, I too am in this stage of discernment of remembering the past (and doing so truthfully) while also building the next step of the journey as I go. It actually was very encouraging to read about "proximate purpose" because I am seeing it play out in many areas of life (dissertation topic, motivation, ministry, etc.). In the education world, it is similar to a concept of proximal learning zone, where there is a sweet spot of drawing on past knowledge and struggling with future knowledge. 