There are two possibilities when it comes to my spheres of influence. First is other veterans I have either served with or know through organizations like the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW). I have had many impromptu conversations with fellow veterans who always seem to walk to open up and talk when I am around them. 

These men and women (primarily men in my personal experience) often look for a connection and brotherhood because by the nature of their service, they interact and are shaped in that way. Many times, once they leave service (especially those who I know at the VFW) are lost and find the community they once had in their service components through these organizations, often times through conversations around the smoking area or bar. 

Many of the people in my particular setting are from the Vietnam era and surprisingly posses a desire to understand a deeper meaning to life. Perhaps it's because they must wrestle with life in a unique way that many others do not because of the very nature of war (it is important to note that the VFW in particular requires a person to have served in a designated combat area of the world). Even if a person is not responsible for taking a life, it is likely that a veteran has encountered death as a result of the military.

Another unique aspect of my particular context is there are not many "younger" veterans from the Iraq and Afghanistan era, so the simple fact that I show up encourages and opens up conversations. They especially turn philosophical when they found that I am a pastor. It can become quite easy to ask reflective questions, because everyone has a unique insight to share with me. 

The second area of influence I have is in those with ADHD. I am very open with my diagnosis and its effects on my life and ministry, and the more that I do that, the more people share their own struggles with me. Just today after a sermon I preached, someone came up and wanted to find out more about what I was studying and how it will be impactful because of her own diagnosis with ADHD. 

The neurodivergent crowd (specifically ADHD) will be a more interesting path I think because it applies directly to my studies, and while the veterans group is quite open, it may actually prove to be more difficult to figure out a way to engage in an intentional and reciprocal relationship of spiritual growth. 