---
{"publish":true,"created":"2025-08-22T12:36:55.962-05:00","modified":"2025-08-22T12:36:55.962-05:00","cssclasses":""}
---

## Introduction.
One does not have to look far to find someone who has been diagnosed with a mental disorder. "According to national censuses, more than 56 million US Americans and 4 million Canadians—almost one in every five North American citizens—identify as having a disability."[[@annandalenaomihDisabilityTheologicalEducation2014]]. In the United States alone, approximately 8.8 million adults[[@scheinEconomicBurdenAttentiondeficit2022, 4]] and 6 million children [[@cdcDataStatisticsADHD2022]] have been diagnosed with ADHD, making it the most prevalent diagnosed mental disorder.  
In addition to the rise of ADHD diagnoses, "having ADHD" has become a colloquialism for a lapse in memory, attention difficulties, or a surge of excess energy. While it is true that most people will experience days or moments in which they are forgetful, extra clumsy, hyper, or any other symptom associated with ADHD, those moments do not often rise to the level of a disorder. A disorder is a condition that affects the life of a person that is atypical from that person's peers in daily work, life, or social situations. Those with ADHD will often need extra accommodations in areas of school and work and will also need to receive extra grace in their relationships with other people that extend beyond a singular moment or day. And while those limitations and struggles are evident in the life of someone with ADHD, they are not the entirety of a person.

How society discusses people with a disorder like ADHD, accommodates said disorders, and values the abilities and lives of people with mental disorders must continue to progress towards people over pathologization.  

ADHD is often discussed by the limitations or flaws of the ADHD person. However, there are both advantages and disadvantages to living with ADHD. These show up in all areas of life including jobs, education, relationships, and specifically in this context, ministry. Age and stage of life will also be considered as there has been a rise in adults of all ages being diagnosed with ADHD.

All areas of life are affected by ADHD, therefore all areas of life should be considered in the treatment and accommodations of the person diagnosed with ADHD. Fields such as education have a jump start on accommodations due to their nature of dealing with learning disabilities, but they often seek to treat the placate the problem above the wholistic education of a person. Other parts of society such as the church are woefully behind in even recognizing ADHD in its congregations, let alone the clergy that serve the church body.

The following paper will define ADHD, both by the "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5-TRTM" (DSM-V) and with other leading experts in the ADHD field. The neurodiversity movement will also be discussed, both its benefits and blind spots to the understanding and treatment of ADHD. Opinions of those who disagree with ADHD as a diagnosis have also been considered and will be discussed as a part of this study. 

By starting to focus on ADHD, which is just one diagnosis of many under the term neurodiversity, the author of this paper will better be able to assist the church in being responsive and compassionate towards all neurodivergent congregants and clergy. Alex Hey stresses about the importance of recognizing ADHD in the church: "The Good Shepherd knows His sheep intimately. How can priests represent Christ if they do not possess an adequate understanding of a good number of His flock."[[@heyCatholicismADHDFinding2019, 129]]

## Defining ADHD
### What is ADHD?
The primary identifier of ADHD according to the DSM-V "is a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development."[[@americanpsychiatricassociationDiagnosticStatisticalManual2022,70]] A patient is assessed by a series of identifiers from the DSM-V. Typically multiple types of questionnaires are used as well as observations from other people who are close to the person being assessed. The traits of ADHD must be observed across multiple areas of life (work, life, school, social, etc.), both as self-reported and as reported by those who have observed the person being assessed in each area of life.

In part, what makes understanding ADHD difficult is the name of the disorder itself. Though Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder implies that a person suffers from a lack of attention, many times the opposite is true. For most people who are diagnosed with ADHD, there is no filter for the overwhelming input of things in their lives that can lay claim to their attention. ADHD coach Alex Hey writes "It is not that those of us with ADHD cannot focus; it is that we cannot regulate where our focus is place,"[[@heyCatholicismADHDFinding2019, 17]] and Dr. Russell Barkley, a leading researcher in ADHD, describes people with ADHD as "blind to time, or nearsighted toward the future."[[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 220]] Understanding the complexities of ADHD will give an understanding of why the process can be thorough, and at times overwhelming.

### Diagnosing ADHD
The diagnosis process can be long and tedious, especially if the person being assessed is an adult. However, the more information an evaluator can gather, the more likely that the correct diagnosis will be reached. While seeking a diagnosis, a person may often feel like they are being attacked, but it is necessary to get the full picture of their life. Dr. Barkley agrees, writing "On the surface it may feel like an intrusion but try to believe that it is in your own best interest to let the professional speak about your concerns and your history with someone who knows you well."[[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 570]] Outside perspectives are important as people may develop blind spots in their lives regarding their disorder, or they have developed coping skills that help to hide the dysfunction.

The DSM-V divides the diagnostic categories of ADHD into two categories. The first category is inattention which is often the side of ADHD associated with lack of focus or inability to follow through with things. The second category is hyperactivity and impulsivity, and this form of ADHD is often associated with restlessness and non-stop. Each category has a list of nine symptoms associated with it, and if someone displays six or more symptoms (five or more for older adolescents and adults) in a category, they are on their way to being diagnosed with ADHD. 

In addition to the symptoms displayed from each category, a person must have displayed the symptoms before age twelve, in multiple settings (work, social, school, etc.), have clear evidence that there is an impairment as a result of the noted symptoms, and the symptoms can not be explained by another mental disorder. When all of the diagnostic tests and interviews are complete and a person meets the criteria to be diagnosed with ADHD, they will receive the diagnosis of ADHD along with a subtype: ADHD-Innattentive, ADHD-Impulsive/Hyperactive, or ADHD-Combined.

### Difficulties in Diagnosing ADHD
As helpful as the DSM-V is, there are some concerns about using it as the only, or even primary tool in the diagnostic process. Questions and checklists are not enough to form a complete and comprehensive evaluation. "Diagnosis is an art as\ well as a science. Accurate diagnosis depends on the adept analysis of a professional with the experience to weigh the results gained from different sources and different parts of the evaluation." [[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 591]] 

Diagnosing ADHD will require knowledge of ADHD, other neurological disorders, the ongoing studies and their subsequent knowledge being discovered by researchers, history, and culture. All of these will come into consideration of diagnosing a person with or without ADHD. This is why in her book *Divergent Mind: Thriving in a World That Wasn't Designed for You*, Jenera Nerenberg writes that "The DSM is more like a catalogue of current social ailments than scientific hardwired 'diseases.'"[[@nerenbergDivergentMindThriving2020, 30]] 

About the race of someone being diagnosed, the DSM-V itself acknowledges that there are lower rates of clinically diagnosed ADHD in certain populations. This comes in part as a result of ADHD being a rule-out diagnosis, or in words if something else can explain ADHD symptoms, that will likely be diagnosed first. Regarding black and non-white Latinx populations in particular, "underdetection may result from mislabeling of ADHD symptoms as oppositional or disruptive in socially oppressed ethnic or racialized groups because of explicit or implicit clinician bias, leading to overdiagnosis of disruptive disorders."[[@americanpsychiatricassociationDiagnosticStatisticalManual2022, 72]]

Racial discrepancies are not the only area we see problems we see in diagnosing ADHD, they also exist between men and women and generations. Young boys are diagnosed with ADHD at a rate of 2:1 compared to girls (1.6:1 for adult men vs women). Generationally, many adults today who potentially have ADHD have not been diagnosed because the disorder itself was seen as something one grew out of as one aged. Additionally, if a person could mask well, they did not have a disorder because they were able to hide the impairments. "Research suggests that ADHD is significantly underdiagnosed in adults. In fact, when adults with undiagnosed ADHD seek mental health treatment, they typically seek treatment for other conditions, such as anxiety and depression, which so often accompany ADHD." [[@nadeauStillDistractedAll2022, 57]]

As helpful as the DSM-V is in documenting, clarifying, and serving as a diagnostic tool for mental health, it is open to new information and change (and rightfully so). Things that were once considered dysfunctions (homosexuality for example) are removed, and criteria for established or new mental disorders are updated. This helps catalog the understanding and knowledge of mental disorders, but it can also be used as evidence by those who oppose the rise in diagnoses of ADHD.

### Opposition To and Concerns About ADHD 

There are people participating in the discussion around ADHD who have concerns about various topics concerning the disorder. These concerns include topics such as the different approaches to the treatment of ADHD or the increasing prevalence of the disorder. Some go as far as denying ADHD exists, writing books such as *ADHD Does Not Exist: The Truth About Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder*[[@saulAdhdDoesNot2014]]. While taking a more cautious approach to diagnosing and treating ADHD should happen because it adds to the conversation and leads to valuable questions being asked, it can quickly become a deterrent to people seeking a diagnosis or pursuing legitimate treatments to manage the unwanted symptoms of ADHD. After all, ADHD is classified by a collection of symptoms leading to an impairment, and impairments should be addressed because as Dr. Barkley writes, "I’ve come to believe that reframing your view of yourself and your life to put ADHD in the picture is in fact among the most crucial changes you can make to master ADHD. It’s the only way I know to keep ADHD from running, or ruining, your life." [[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 960]]

The major concerns surrounding ADHD can be broken down into two major topics. The first is the rise in cases of ADHD in the past couple of decades, and the second is the use of stimulant medication to help treat the symptoms of ADHD. Essentially it boils down to the questions of what causes ADHD and how we treat it. 
#### The Rise of ADHD  
In the first sentence of the introduction of his book _ADHD Does Not Exist: The Truth About Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder_, Dr. Richard Saul writes that "Over 4 percent of all adults and 11 percent of U.S. children are diagnosed with ADHD —more than a 40 percent jump in the last decade."[[@saulAdhdDoesNot2014, 1]] 

It's no secret that the amount of things in our society that can pull our attention has risen. Everything from ads found in and on any available free space to the ability to access any piece of information using the smartphone in your pocket can pull the attention of a person existing in the world. As mentioned before, one of the defining features of ADHD is not a lack of focus, but rather the inability to filter out what is unimportant. If the environment surrounding an individual constantly seeks to grab their attention, it is worth asking the question: What actually causes ADHD?

It is understood that ADHD is a heritable disorder. If a person is getting their kid diagnosed with ADHD they should look at assessing themselves as well. The DSM-V writes that "the heritability of ADHD is approximately 74%"[[@americanpsychiatricassociationDiagnosticStatisticalManual2022, 71]] and in his research, Dr. Barkley has found that "ten to 35% of the immediate family members of children with ADHD have the disorder."[[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 990]]

In an attempt to answer the question "What is stealing our focus?", journalist and author Johann Hari went on a journey to explore topics surrounding the ability to focus such as the role of sleep, environment, diet, and mental health (to include ADHD). He documents it in a book titled _Stolen Focus: Why You Can't Pay Attention--and How to Think Deeply Again_. In his interviews with many different researchers and practitioners, a prevailing theme arose, and that is that environment plays a much more important role in the development of ADHD than previously thought.

This is an important discussion topic because it can address how people are treated for ADHD symptoms and it can affect the way mental health is addressed in the future. However, it does not negate genetics completely from the discussion. In one interview with Professor Joel Nigg, former president of the International Society and Research for Child and Adolescent Psychopathology, Hari is told that "it used to be thought that some kids were simply wired by their genes to be different and to develop different brains. But, as he has written, now 'the science has moved on.' The latest research shows that 'genes aren't destiny; rather they affect probability.'"[[@hariStolenFocusWhy2022, 235]] In other words, the genes for ADHD are likely there, but the environment in which a person exists has a factor in how a person's brain responds to those external stimuli.

While the researchers and practitioners Hari interviewed for his book may have disagreed about the cause of ADHD and its treatment, they did agree that it was a real diagnosis. Dr. Richard Saul dismisses ADHD entirely. He believes that ADHD is nothing more than a combination of many different neurological disorders that, if diagnosed and treated individually, would negate the ADHD diagnosis entirely. It would appear that Dr. Saul's major complaints are that when ADHD is diagnosed so freely, it allows for people seeking stimulant medication easier access, and that ADHD has become nothing more than an easy diagnosis for undertrained, overworked, and profit-driven medical practitioners.[[@saulAdhdDoesNot2014, xvi]] 

#### Treating ADHD
There are many different approaches to treating ADHD. These approaches can include interventions such as therapy, ADHD coaches, counselors, and accountability partners. However, according to Dr. Barkley, "research shows medications are the most effective treatment currently available for ADHD, being at least twice as effective as non medication treatments like counseling or behavior therapy and improving symptoms in 70 – 95 % of the adults who take them." He goes on to write that medication "makes most other interventions work better as well."[[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 2338, 2340]] 

To understand the controversy surrounding ADHD medication, one must understand that one of the most effective interventions to address the symptoms of ADHD is stimulant medications. These drugs are classified as Schedule II drugs by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), and that means stimulants such as Adderall and Ritalin, which are effective in treating ADHD, are labeled by the DEA as potentially addictive. 

With a label such as that, it is understandable why medical practitioners and patients alike can be hesitant to seek out medication to treat ADHD. Furthermore, it is unrealistic to expect all medical practitioners to fully understand the benefits of stimulants in the treatment of ADHD. In her book titled _Still Distracted After All These Years: Help and Support for Older Adults with ADHD_, Dr. Kathleen Nadeau writes that according to Dr. David Goodman, "the typical psychiatrist receives less than a single day of instruction on the diagnosis and treatment of adult ADHD" and also, according to Dr. Josh Geffen, many doctors who seek to enter into the field of ADHD were viewed as pill pushers or gullible supplier of medication to stimulant seeking adult patients.[[@nadeauStillDistractedAll2022, 95]]

In Hari's book _Stolen Focus_, he highlights a study done in Australia in which a doctor named Nadine Ezard was treating people addicted to methamphetamine with dextroamphetamine, a stimulant drug prescribed to many people diagnosed with ADHD. This concerned another doctor Hari interviewed named Sammi Timi who primarily treated patients through long-term counseling. Dr. Timi said, "I felt unsettled to learn that the drugs we give kids turn out to be a reasonable proxy for meth."[[@hariStolenFocusWhy2022, 228-229]]

When arguments like this are presented, it further divides patients and practitioners against one another as to the best way to treat ADHD. And no matter if medical practitioners such as Dr. Nadine Ezard or Dr. Russell Barkley (who has studied ADHD for most of his career) can explain that medication is well-studied, safe, and effective, it is difficult to combat colleagues and peers comparing stimulants to methamphetamine, prescribing practitioners as pill pushers, or patients as drug seekers. 

If our healthcare professionals were better trained in assessing and diagnosing ADHD and other mental health disorders (a thought that even Dr. Saul can agree with), then effective treatment would move beyond the discussion of medication versus no medication and into asking the question of "what are the best tools for this particular patient?" This should likely include medical professionals, counselors, coaches, a strong support system, ownership of the diagnosis, and hard work. 

Dr. Nadeau writes it best: "Pills don't build skills."[[@nadeauStillDistractedAll2022, 88]]  
## Living with ADHD  
### The Struggles of ADHD  

ADHD is a difficult disorder to live with because it affects all areas of one's life. Referring back to the diagnostic criteria found in the DSM-V, someone must demonstrate impairments in two or more settings of their life.

Here is a list of the potential negative issues that can be experienced as a result of ADHD, as listed in the DSM-V[[@americanpsychiatricassociationDiagnosticStatisticalManual2022, 72-75]]:  
- Increased risk of suicide ideation in children  
- Increased suicide attempts in adults  
- A predictor in suicide attempts by US Army soldiers  
- Lower education and vocational success on average  
- More likely to be injured  
- More likely to suffer from PTSD  
- More traffic incidents (tickets and accidents)  
- A shortened life expectancy  
- Higher risk for obesity and hypertension  
- More likely to have a comorbid mental health disorder  
- More likely to have sleep disorders  

Here is another list, written about by various professionals, of potential negative effects as a result of ADHD.  
* Dr. Barkley writes that "at least 50% and as many as 70% of children with ADHD had no close friends by the time they reached second or third grade."[[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 4906. Kindle]]  
* Alex Hey writes about his struggles regarding his spiritual life, often questioning God if his lack of focus is displeasing. [[@heyCatholicismADHDFinding2019, 52]]  
* Dr. Nadeau writes that a child with ADHD may receive up to "twenty thousand corrective or negative comments by the time they are ten years old," and that is in school alone.[[@nadeauStillDistractedAll2022, 27]]  
* "In a US survey of mental disorders among 2399 adults residing in English-speaking households, ADHD was associated with an average of 35 days of lost work productivity annually, due either to absenteeism or to low performance while at work."[[@maoPhysicianGuideHelping2011, 63]]   

## The  Neurodiversity Movement and Reframing ADHD and Other Mental Disorders  
### What is Neurodiversity? 

Dr. Julia Frueh writes that "neurodiversity describes the idea that people experience and interact with the world around them in many different ways; there is no one 'right' way of thinking, learning, and behaving, and differences are not viewed as deficits."[[@fruehWhatNeurodiversity2021]] Another term associated with neurodiversity is neurodivergent. "If neurodiversity is the umbrella term —a fact of the human species—then neurodivergent is the term to be applied to individuals. If a person has been labeled or identifies as ADHD, autistic, bipolar, dyslexic, or another "diagnosis," that person is said to be neurodivergent."[[@nerenbergDivergentMindThriving2020, 15]]  

On the surface, that definition does not seem controversial, however it is a departure from the way various mental disorders have been viewed and treated previously. Most attempts to address disorders such as dyslexia, autism, ADHD, schizophrenia, etc. have been an attempt at returning a person to a baseline of "normal" or "typical." The implicit message that is expressed is that someone with a disorder is somehow less than their peers who are considered typical using the standards of what their society has deemed as appropriate.  

### Neurodiversity Acceptance and Benefits

The movement that is neurodiversity is a movement towards acceptance of people above dysfunction. This movement is important because, for many people suffering from any kind of mental disorder, much of their lives are spent hiding the impairment or feeling inadequate to their peers. Removing the stigmas associated with a mental disorder such as ADHD allows a person to address the symptoms that cause impairments while also celebrating the gifts and abilities of them as a person.  

In his book _The Power of Neurodiversity: Unleashing the Advantages of Your Differently Wired Brain_, Dr. Thomas Armstrong continues the work of pushing back against the pathologization of people in an attempt to treat a disorder. While having medical documentation and lists to check off may ultimately help someone receive a diagnosis, people are not machines.[[@armstrongPowerNeurodiversityUnleashing2011, 9]] They are biological organisms that react to thoughts, environmental inputs, love, threats, violence, fears, and every other experience that a human may go through. 

How people speak about mental disorders, whether it be about their disorders or the disorders of others, matters. The consequences of those words matter and can be the difference between seeing a person before a disorder instead of a disorder before a person. 

When writing about the spiritual aspects of acceptance, Alex Hey reminds the readers that the traits of a person's life can help give a picture of them, but they do not make them. "We do not find our identity in ADHD or any other disability, nor in our height, weight, hair color, eye color, skin color, or sexual orientation. Our true identity comes from the one who created us. Being created in the image and likeness of God gives the human person a special dignity."[[@heyCatholicismADHDFinding2019, 87]]  Dr. Barkley has a similar sentiment, writing "Happiness or at least contentment can come only from accepting yourself as you are, and that includes ADHD."[[@barkleyTakingChargeAdult2022, location 949, Kindle]]

Dr. Armstrong is not the only person continuing to call for change in understanding neurodiversity. Dr. Kathleen Nadeau has written a book about ADHD for adults who are fifty-five years and older, and Jenara Nerenberg has a book that helps women find answers as they have been overlooked in the mental health world for so long. Their work is helping to normalize the conversation of neurodiversity and people who identify as neurodivergent. All of these works are seeking to understand that neurodivergent brains are diverse more so than dysfunctional."This shift in language and narrative is empowering and less pathologizing."[[@nerenbergDivergentMindThriving2020, 15]] 

### Neurodiversity Beyond the Individual

A rise in understanding neurodiversity and neurodivergent people is leading to research that has real-world merit. This research covers things such as how to best educate children in school, the best medication to use (and how to prevent it from being abused), causes of mental disorders, genetics, environment, culture, workplace management, etc. 

Dr. Alice Mao, along with Drs. Thomas Babcock, and Manisha Madhoo, wrote a paper helping primary care providers address ADHD in patients who are seeking help related to struggles in the workplace. They write "Primary care providers, who serve as a home base for patient-centered medical issues, are concerned with the overall well-being of the patient and the patient’s family."[[@maoPhysicianGuideHelping2011, 61]] This puts primary care providers in an excellent position to intervene and provide resources and support for individuals seeking help with ADHD.

Helping adults find meaningful and successful careers is important for the individual and society. As it relates to ADHD and employment, Dr. Nadeau points out that there are very few people who specialize in career placement and cognitive considerations.[[@nadeauCareerChoicesWorkplace2005, 549]] There are possibly many reasons for this, but it is most likely to be as simple as poor knowledge of ADHD and other neurodivergent diagnoses.

Randall Robbins explores the management of ADHD employees in a journal article titled "The Untapped Potential of the ADHD Employee in the Workplace." Robbins provides various rationales for being a better manager of an employee with ADHD. Among them are financial and possible legal costs, compliance with the law, and ethical implications. Robbins then moves on to discuss the benefits of employing people with ADHD and how small changes can easily make way for accommodations that will allow those employees to thrive in the workplace, ultimately being an asset to a company. An added benefit is that any small change to better accommodate one employee potentially has the benefit of helping undiagnosed ADHD and neurotypical employees alike.

While a negative reading of this article could be that companies should manage people better for more profit, the result for the employee with ADHD is the same: a fulfilling career, meaningful accommodations, and being treated as an asset as opposed to a liability. Specifically beneficial for a manager of people is the idea of emotional contagion. Emotional contagion occurs when the moods of people who share a workspace are absorbed by those around them. "The moods of ADHD employees can affect others positively or negatively, and improving the well-beings of some employees could improve overall morale."[[@robbinsUntappedPotentialAdhd2017, 9]] Happier people beget happier people. Addressing ADHD in the workplace in a positive manner will likely have the effect of improving morale for all people. 

## Summary, Conclusions, and Reflections

No matter a person's view on ADHD, there is a collection of symptoms, that when organized together result in the impairment of an individual. This ultimately results in a disorder known as ADHD. 

Researchers need to continue to understand the origins of ADHD, but never at the expense of the people who are suffering from the disorder currently. There can coexist a call for societal changes to better care for people now and in the future, while also acknowledging the struggles and challenges one is facing today. The more that is learned about ADHD, the better the holistic approach can be towards the treatment of ADHD symptoms. 

Non-ADHD specialist medical practitioners such as primary care providers, psychologists, or psychiatrists who specialize in other mental health illnesses are often going to the first medical professionals a person sees about symptoms of ADHD. Therefore, medical practitioners should continue to learn about and understand ADHD. At the very least, they should be open to and knowledgeable about who to refer a patient to if there are concerns about ADHD diagnosis and treatment. 

Spiritual leaders should be aware of ADHD and other neurodivergent diagnoses. There are people in their care as well as colleagues who may be struggling with impairments themselves. How a faith leader addresses neurodivergence can give value to someone who does not see it in themselves.

Finally, we should all do better in addressing how we speak about ADHD and other mental illnesses. Whether a person was diagnosed as a kid or sought a diagnosis as an adult, there have likely been struggles with education, relationships, health, work, and self-worth. Placing someone's intrinsic worth as a person above the impairments from a disorder will benefit all of society. If we can treat just one disorder with more respect, it easily opens the door to treating everyone with respect. 

\pagebreak
# Bibliography 