---
word-goal: 4000
publish: true
---

## Introduction 

In order to embrace the full image of Christ, Christians must be comfortable in engaging with people who are different from them. Differences can (and should) be expected in the body of believers, because after all, Christianity is a worldwide religion. However, it is likely safe to assume that most local churches do not represent the entirety of the many different cultures found around the world. A local group of believers are more likely to be a representation of the community in which they find themselves. For example, a local church in the hills of Appalachia will look vastly different than a church in the urban center of Nairobi, Kenya. There is nothing inherently wrong with churches reflecting their communities, providing they are a reflection of the entirety of the community.

There are many churches that seek to embrace diverse parts of their community, and they will do so in areas such as age (multi-generational), race (multi-cultural), or social classes (mixed economical). These are great divides to be crossed and the church is all the better for the mixing of these groups of people. However, there is one group that is easily overlooked, and in many ways is forgotten and pushed off to the side, and that is the disabled community. 

The disability community is distinct from the previously listed groups because it moves in and between all walks of life with little regard to a person's age, race, or economic situation. Dr. Lamar Hardwick, known by his online persona as "The Autism Pastor"[^1] writes "The disability community is the most unique community, the largest minority group in the world. Yet it is still the most inclusive group in the world, because anyone from any walk of life can join the disability community." [@hardwickDisabilityChurchVision2021, 12] While it seems like quite the broad generalization, and some readers will bristle at being considered disabled or in a minority community, it is the hope of this author that by the end of this paper, there will be an understanding of disability theology, why disability theology is good to study, and ultimately, how the Church will benefit when we seek to understand God from the point of view of those people who have been relegated to the wings of the church and society, whether it be intentionally or even worse, intentionally.

## Defining Disability

What makes someone disabled? The term disability can mean different things to different people; it is also a term that has changed meaning as the way in which society approaches people with a disability has evolved. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) defines a disability as "any condition of the body or mind (impairment) that makes it more difficult for the person with the condition to do certain activities (activity limitation) and interact with the world around them (participation restrictions)."[@cdcDisabilityHealthOverview2024]

The CDC's definition is a helpful starting point as it begins to allow persons who fit that definition to begin to receive accommodations, financial assistance (particularly in regards to insurance claims in the United States), and at times, legal protection from discrimination. As helpful as the CDC's definition is at providing a beginning framework for the discussion of disabilities, its primary purpose, like many other definitions from the medical community, is to create a classification that divides people, therefore is gives no direction in how to approach the topic of disability as a society.

Another way to identify something as a disability to is to reference the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). "The ICF conceptualizes a person’s level of functioning as a dynamic interaction between their health conditions, environmental factors, and personal factors. Functioning and disability are on a continuum and are described in terms of body structures and body functions/impairments, activities/activity limitations and participation/participation restrictions."[@WhatICFICF] A model such as the ICF attempts to be as neural as possible when assessing a medical matter. 

As such, the ICF can be adapted to different academic pursuits while also providing a common language when discussing research between disciplines. For example, when studying inclusivity in universities, Alberto Arenghi and Ilaria Garofolo used the ICF to help categorize research subjects particularly when looking at where the universities fell short in their inclusivity goals for all students. "The ICF is useful in Higher Education because it allows governance bodies and planners of the built and the learning environment consider the design impact of differing characteristics of students from various backgrounds and ages".[@benciniMyUniversityInclusive2021] Without a tool such as the ICF, efforts into making places more inclusive would rely on whoever is the loudest, as opposed to having data to make informed decisions that are inclusive to everyone.

Both the CDC and WHO use definitions that rely on the medical model of disability. "The medical model tends to reduce disability to a problem requiring diagnosis and treatment, a broken object to be fixed, made better, or overcome. In so doing, however, the person becomes reduced to a function of disabilities rather than vice  versa."[@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, 25] There are many benefits of the medical community weighing in on disabilities, but depending solely on a view that approaches a disability as something that needs to be fixed, removes a person first approach to the impairment, which can remove personal autonomy, leading to removing many civil rights from the individual. 

Finally the last disability definition worth exploring is the social model of disability. This definition would define something as a disability when a person's particular impairment prevents them for joining into an activity or social environment. For example, a person who uses a wheelchair becomes disabled when there are access barriers (i.e., when there is no ramp to enter a building or an elevator to travel to the fourth floor). Thus it is that, as a loss of bodily function, impairment is socially transformed into a disability, a restriction of activity that excludes social participation. Perhaps we might then see disability less as something one has, or worse is, and more a series of moments defined by interactions between people and the public institutions where they occur."[@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, 26]

The social model of disability broadens the definition exponentially. Many people  deal with impairments every day. Impairments can be permanent (accident or disease) or temporary (i.e. post surgery recovery, concussion, or pulled muscle). Some of those impairments may rise to the level disability (this is where a model such as the ICF can come in handy) and others are merely distractions or annoyances. Dr. Hardwick helps to clarify this point further by writing "If you currently leverage any equipment, medication, or other support measures, such as corrective lenses, to assist your body in functioning, then by the broadest definition, you are already a member of the disability community."[@hardwickDisabilityChurchVision2021] To put it more simply, if one can not do what they want  because of an impairment, they have become socially disabled. 

### Impairment vs Disability

Perhaps the difference between an impairment and a disability seems minute, but it is a radical shift in how society treats those that are different from what is considered socially "normal." In his book *Vulnerable Communion*, Thomas Reynolds writes about a concept called the "cult of normalcy," which is an idea that a group of people will self segregate and determine what is "normal," and that by default, will define what is abnormal. The "normal" group will seek to protect itself and will eventually end up shunning those who are abnormal according to their standards. [@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, Ch. 2] The radical shift then would to be identify and discover how an impairment can be prevented from turning into a disabling attbiubute. 

This can seem to be an insurmountable task, but one that is not foreign to most people. It is possible to reframe the word impairment to dependability, or at the very least pair the two words together. If a person has an ailment, disease, sickness, or physical impairment, they become dependent on people or things to navigate the world, or in other words, they are dependent on something or someone other than themselves. Most people with eyeglasses will be able to attest to the dependability on a physical object for assistance. If said eyeglasses were to become lost or broken, it may be possible to go about their day, but at a disability depending on the strength of their prescription, thus losing their full capacity of interacting in their world. 

To expand this idea further, one could look at the life cycle of a human being (which if you're reading this, you have at least begun). When a person is born, they are born with impairments. A baby is not able to care for itself in any capacity. At most, a baby can indicate to the world that they are hungry, dirty, sick, uncomfortable, or sleepy. They are not disabled if they have a competent care taker. They can exist in the world to the capacity they are able to with assistance, not hinderance. As the human life cycle continues, many people will go on to live lives that are deemed "normal" or able-bodied according to the societies in which they exist. If a person is fortunate to live to an old age, it is likely that they will need care beyond themselves, again rendering them with an impairment that is likely to turn into a disability if they are not offered the proper accommodations.[@yongDisabilityRenewalTheological2016, 263] 


## Why Disability Theology Matters

There are many reasons to care about disability theology, but the primary focus for this paper is hospitality. Aiding in the definition of hospitality as it pertains to the focus of this paper, we will turn towards Dr. Reynolds once again: "Hospitality involves actively welcoming and befriending the stranger-in this case, a person with disabilities-not as a spectacle, but as some one with inherent value, loved into being by God, created in the image of God, and thus having unique gifts to offer as a human being." [@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, 14] The highlight of that definition is a person having inherent value simply for being human. To fully grasp the fullness of that idea, one must move beyond their own selves to see the worth of other people just as they are able to see it in themselves. Therefore, if a person is able to be hospitable, many other areas of exclusion will naturally remedy themselves.

Studying hospitality through the lens of disability theology will change the way we interact with people and highlight some of the ableist words and postures Christians hold onto. It should also begin to reveal the barriers inside church buildings that prevent people from fully engaging with the local body of believers. Finally, studying disability theology should spur on Christians to become advocates for a more inclusive environment, including physical space, language, liturgy, personal autonomy and decision making, and any event outside of the typical Sunday morning gathering.

### Ableism
It is recognized that this shift is no small endeavor for many people inside (and outside) of the church because it requires much self-reflection and unlearning of previously held ideas and biases. The life of a Christian is one of hospitality, thus it is of the utmost importance to do the work of working towards inclusion and away from exclusion. Like many other forms of division in the Church that have seen throughout history, such as racism, classism, or sexism, ableism[^2] separates people who have been deemed disabled into groups to be cast away and pushed out of the full experience of the church, often times relegated to objects of pity and charity.

Ableism itself, is an impairment that often times leads to a disability. It prevents those holding ableist attitudes to fully embrace the entirety of God's creation because it is used to exclude people. Likewise, those who suffer by way of people and institutions that hold ableist behaviors and policies will never be fully a part of a community. Simply identifying ableism as an impairment is not the end of the discussion. Being able to identify an impairment (much like being able to medically identify an impairment or disability using the ICF) gives people an understanding of the impairment in order to address it before it comes disabling. 


In his book *Disability Friendly: How to Move from Clueless to Inclusive*, John D. Kemp *Esq.* writes "As individuals, we need to see how our common traits of kindness, understanding, resilience, adaptability, and self-respect will allow us to overcome ableism by recognizing our common humanity. In doing so, this will guide each of us in how to adapt to new ideas, hold important conversations, and broaden our perspectives." Being hospitable is the only way in which people can gather together to have difficult discussions with one another. At the very least, being open to hospitality will allow a person to engage with disability theology on their own, further opening up the door to inclusive hospitality in their day to day lives. 


## Creating a Welcoming Community
### The Church and Disability

The church, like society, has changed in its understanding and practices surrounding the disability community. Unfortunately churches are often time slow to include people with disabilities fully into the body of believers. Many times the secular world is ahead of the church in areas of inclusions. It is worth pointing out that many times this happens because laws are put into place to preclude businesses from discriminating against disabilities. As a result of not allowing discrimination, businesses have been forced to embrace disability inclusion, and because of that, savvy business leaders and managers have begun to see, market, and uphold the beneficial attributes to the productivity and money earning goals of said businesses by way of celebrating the people in the disability community who had been previously discriminated against.[@robbinsUntappedPotentialAdhd2017] Though the reasons for inclusion seem dubious at best, the result was still a recognition of the value of people who exist in the world differently than most. Even better, those same people who had been cast aside were able to find purpose and community, even if it was through a job.

One of the most important pieces of legislation enacted to protect those with a disability is the American Disability Act. "The American Disability Act (ADA) protects people with disabilities from discrimination. Disability rights are civil rights. From voting to parking, the ADA is a law that protects people with disabilities in many areas of public life." [@AmericansDisabilitiesAct] The monumental piece of legislation opened the door for a large portion of the population to be recognized as worthy of being a part of society. However, any religious entities are exempt (to include buildings like daycares or schools that a religious group operates).[@ReligiousEntitiesAmericans]

There are a couple of main reasons religious institutions argued for an exemption to the ADA. First is cost. For many church buildings, the expectation to renovate an old building would have been prohibited to carrying out the mission of the church in the community. If funds were diverted to projects such as ramps, larger bathrooms, wider doors, etc., then that same money would not be able to be used to carry out such acts such as feeding, clothing, or counseling people. This argument supports the primary objection against the ADA for religious  institutions (particularly Christian churches in this case), which is "that requiring religious entities to comply with the ADA amounts to impermissible government interference with religion."[@payneAmericanChurchAmericans2021, 3] Unironically, the argument used towards preserving the civil liberty of the church seemingly used to exclude people due to inconvenience. 

Since the church is not beholden to the ADA, it is then entirely up to the local church to be inclusive to the community it finds itself. Unfortunately, a result of the ADA exemption has led to most Christian programming and education to cater towards able-bodied people, it also pitted us against the disability community. Johnny Payne writes "few other religious groups made arguments similar to those Ball[^3] made on behalf of Christian groups lobbying against being included in the ADA. Christians stood nearly alone against access for disabled people as part of religious groups."[@payneAmericanChurchAmericans2021, 3] How else are people in the disability community supposed to respond to these arguments besides assuming they are not welcome into the life of the local church?

Being exempt from the law which protects people with disabilities, should motivate the church to go beyond the bare minimum of what the law requires, and to seek to be inclusive in a way that only the love of God can compel. Only in this way can a church practice true hospitality and be a welcoming place to be in community with one anther. 

### A Welcoming Environment

The Church must ensure that it is being hospital with good intentions and more importantly, a true desire to be inclusive of all people. To enter into the work of reconciliation, especially with those who have been marginalized for so long is going to take hard work. "The reality of cultural and religious diversity and the need for justice among people who are marginalized and poor makes the gospel message of love and neighborliness especially relevant. But we must tread with great caution. Inclusion is risky business. Too often it is servant to the status quo, championing the interests of convention rather than attending, to the particular uniqueness of persons." [@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, 46]. The Church can not charge head first into a problem they have historically known nothing about and expect to be welcomed with open arms. 

This means going beyond physical improvements to a building. It is not enough to get people in the door. Hospitality requires committing to the entirety of the person. the relationship between you and them, and the relationship between them and God. For example, if someone who uses a wheelchair for mobility is able to get into the physical space of a church's Sunday service, many congregations would call that a victory (and to some churches that is worth celebrating). If said church is like many others, there are different times in the gathering time in which people are asked to stand, sit, or kneel. So what was a victory of a person entering into the physical space is now hampered by someone from the stage saying "please stand," when a slight changing of words to "Please rise in body or in spirit" would continue to the prevention of an impairment becoming a disability.[@barbaranewmanUniversalDesignWorship, 4]

This may seem like a lot of work, but being hospitable requires that work from the Church. Again, small changes like the one mentioned in the paragraph above are not done to appease people who are different, they are done because people with impairments and disabilities are worthy of being a part of the body of Christ because they are made in Christ's image. Dr. Hardwick writes that "Equality is necessary for the gospel to be taken seriously. We cannot seek diversity without unity, and we cannot seek unity without equality."[@hardwickDisabilityChurchVision2021, 33] It is a damage to a Christian's witness of love when they exclude people in the disability community from full involvement into the body of Christ. Jesus did not go to the cross the only for those who are able-bodied. 

When Jesus appears after the resurrection, he comes back in a body that is disfigured from the crucifixion."The disabled body of Jesus represents one who understands by embodying disability even in his transformed, resurrected body. Furthermore, it suggests that disability indicates not a flawed humanity but a full humanity."[@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, 207] The barriers that the Church puts up to prevent disabled people from joining are man made barriers to the full vision of the body of Christ.

So what is a church to do if it decides to face its deep seated ableism and begin to work towards inclusion of the disability community? The very first step is to pray and seek guidance, endurance, and an open and willing heart towards the work of inclusion. Next, start in the local church as that is where most people will have meaningful influence. 

In the next section, there will be question prompts and tools to help identify areas in the local church that need to be addressed and rectified in order to be more inclusive of the entirety of the local community.

### Assess Your Own Area
> "The diversity discussion begins by asking questions about who's missing from our communities, our classrooms, our boardrooms, and most importantly our churches. Next, we need to ask, where are they? Where are the people who don't look like us, and how can we place them at the center of the story and raise our sense of awareness about the lives they live and the value they have in the eyes of God? How can the church dive headfirst into the responsibility of creating communities where missing sheep are valued and pursued with the same passion and persistence as the wealthy-but-risk-taking shepherd? What effort can the church make to ensure that their community is not comfortable with being insensitive, ineffective, and incomplete?"[@hardwickDisabilityChurchVision2021, 29]

A church must begin by knowing how they are perceived and understood by the people in disability community. It may be a sobering activity, but it is one that has to take place in order to understand the starting point. And "if you aren’t regularly receiving accommodation requests, don’t assume it’s because your church is already accessible."[@kennyAbleismStillCore2022, 3] It is more than likely that people do not want to speak up for fear of being put into a category of disability, or even worse, a person who needs an accommodation has not made it into a space of being able to ask for the assistance. Until a church knows for sure where their ableism is prevalent, it can not make any significant changes to being more inclusive.

An easy place to start is by doing a walk around of the church building and property. Such checklists can be found by searching the internet or reaching out to a local disability advocacy group.[^4] Even better if multiple people help with the walk around, specifically to include people living with impairments. 

Another activity that would be helpful is to survey and interview people connected to and members of the local congregation. Be sure to include people with impairments and without. This practice will help leader with two objectives. First, to see how those with impairments perceive the inclusive nature of the local church, and second, how far the gap is between the perceived inclusivity and the experience of people who feel excluded. Dr. Erik Carter includes two helpful guides in his book *Including People with Disabilities in Faith Communities*, particularly in "Chapter 2: A Welcoming Congregation" and "Chapter 3: Welcoming, Including, and Connecting."[@carterIncludingPeopleDisabilities2007] 

### Universal Design
A local church can also begin implementing the tenants of universal design into it's building space and liturgy. Universal design was developed in 1997 by a team led by Ronald Mace from North Carolina State University. He and his team outline the seven principles of universal design: 
	1. Equitable Use: The Design is useful and marketable to people with diverse abilities
	2. Flexibility in Use: The design accommodates a wide range of individual preferences and abilities.
	3. Simple and Intuitive Use: Use of the design is easy to understand, regardless of the user's experience, knowledge language skills, or current concentration level.
	4. Perceptible Information: The design communicates necessary information effectively to the user, regardless of ambient conditions or the user's sensory abilities.
	5. Tolerance for Error: The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequences of accidental or unintended actions.
	6. Low Physical Effort: The design can be used efficiently and comfortably and with a minimum of fatigue.
	7. Size and Space for Approach and Use: Appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and use regardless of user's body size, posture, or mobility.[@Principles]

Universal Design came about in the architectural world, but it is helpful in that it can be used to assess current environments and layouts, as well as planning for future buildings or projects in and around the local church. At best, these principles force people to engage in their local environment with a new perspective, and if done so from a posture of humility and learning, will begin to encourage people to find new ways to always be inclusive before the need is identified. 

## Conclusion

Hospitality is an important aspect of the church because it invites inclusion to the family of believers. "The ultimate goal for the church's ministry to persons with disabilities is not different from its goal for ministry to every person. We desire for each person to take one's place in society as a reasonably independent individual, to be reasonably happy in that place, and to attain the fullness of one's potential as a child of God."[@ohsbergChurchPersonsHandicaps1982, 20] If a church continues to embrace the ableism permeates through its structures, then it will never allow all people to feel welcome at the table. 

At its heart, ableism is telling people with impairments and disabilities that they are not worth the effort and therefore not fully welcome to be fully included into the body of believers. That is why a majority of this paper focused on understanding why looking at theology from a disability perspective is of the utmost importance. Not only for people who are represented in such theology, but for the entirety of the Church to be fully complete and without the sin of exclusion. 

Once the heart begins to change and people who have been labeled as different are seen as inherently valuable simply because they are made in the image of God, then the work of inclusion becomes much easier. It won't be perfect, but gone will the desire to keep others away to maintain the status quo, or the "cult of normalcy" as Reynolds writes in his book.[@reynoldsVulnerableCommunionTheology2008, Ch. 2] There will be a desire to ensure everyone feels welcome and has the ability to participate in all aspects of the church life. Hopefully that turns into a desire to look for disabling attitudes and spaces before they begin to impede upon the impairments of others. We do this not because we are saviors or heroes, but because we love our fellow humans in the way that Christ loves creation, unconditionally to the point of self sacrifice. 

[^1]: https://autismpastor.com 
[^2]: Ableism is the favoring of people who are able-bodied or able-minded over those who are considered disabled[@yongDisabilityRenewalTheological2016, 250]
[^3]: William Bentley Ball represented the Association of Christian Schools International when seeking an exemption from the ADA.
[^4]: A two page checklist can be found at: https://abilityministry.com/church-campus-accessibility-checklist/