---
publish: true
---

- Judgement should start with out own community
- Judgement is an invitation to repentance

- Life is a journey, and anything good and worthwhile takes time to develop. Rarely will it just “appear” 
	* That includes our relationship with The Holy Spirit
-  Our spiritual lives aren’t up and to the right always, it can be a chaotic journey. 
	* Reminds me of west vs. east spirituality talked about in [[leeOurUnformingDeWesternizing2022|Cindy Lee’s Book]]

## [Luke 13:10-17](https://lectionary.library.vanderbilt.edu/texts/?y=384&z=p&d=70)

- Sabbath is all about healing, not rule keeping
	- That means the lady being healed should have been a time for celebration, but instead people were mad at Jesus because he “broke the rules”
	- It’s crazy because this lady was a son of Abraham, a part of their community already!
- whoever Jesus draws to us, we are to welcome them with open arms. The church doesn’t belong to us, it belongs to Jesus. 
	- If Jesus is calling people to himself (the head of the church), then who are we to turn people away?


- We can get wrapped up in our self-righteousness, so we have to be on guard
- The church should be the most radically welcoming place on the planet
	- If there is someone we think needs grace, then church should be the exact place want them to be

- If you respond to the call of Jesus, then you better be ready for Jesus to actually call you to stuff…good, bad, hard, exhausting, exhilarating

- Healing can be instant, but it can also be lifelong
	- Sometimes a doctor can fix you instantly, other times you’re on a treatment plan for your entire life
	- In Christianity, healing is death…….
		- Death to our egos, pride, judgement, selfishness, anger, etc.



